490
aue
orple
1.
RECENT STUDIES ON FREE-LIVING BLUE-GREEN ALGAE AND
AZOLLA AT THE INTERNATIONAL RICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE
P.A. ROGERa and I. WATANABE
The International Rice Research Institute
Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines
Sammary. Major findings in 1985-86 at the International Rice Research Institute
on
:
(IRRI)
ecology and practical utilization of free-living and symbiotic blue-green algae (BGA) are
summarized. They cover the chemical composition of cultures and nstural samples of N2-
fixing BGA from rice fields : abundance of heterocystous BGA in rice soils and soil-based
inocula : dynamics of sigal populations and acetylene reducing activity in soils inoculated with
BGA :soil properties aad Azolla growth : Azolla response to P. K. Za in various soils in relation
to floodwater chemistry : Azolls insect pests : and availability of Azolla N to rice.
During the last 10 years, IRRI has initiated a dynamic research program in
the field of biofertilizers and biological nitrogen fixation (BNF). The goal is to obtain
good rice yields with the lowest possible use of chemical N fertilizer by utilizing N2-
fixing organisms and farm-grown source of nutrients. The objectives are :
to collect, identify, and conserve N2-fizing organisms from rice soils ;
to.determine N fixed by these organisms and the factors influencing their activity;
. to develop methods and cultural practices enhancing BNF in rice fields ;
- to establish with scientists from selected countries a cooperative research
network on BNF in rice fields : and
. to train scientists who can strengthen the national capabilities for conducting
research on BNF.
Recent reviews by IRRI authors summarize the current status of knowledge
and practical utilization of BNF in rice fields (Watanabe and Roger, 1984; Watanabe,
1985; Roger and Watanabe, 1986).
BNF research programs at IRRI are supported by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). Results are extended to national research systems
through the international Network for Soil Fertility and Fertilizer Evaluation for
Rice. (INSFFER), supported by the Government of Switzerland.
RESEARCH ON FREE-LIVING BLUE-GREEN ALGAE.
Agronomic interest in BGA started in the1930s when De attributed the high
spontaneous fertility of submerged rice soils to BGA. Since then, BGA has been
cited as' a" promising potential source of nitrogen for rice", many trials of algal
inoculation have been conducted in rice growing countries, and inoculation of rice
fields with BGA' has been recomi mended (Venkataraman, 1981). In 1986, BGA is
still-only "promising", and the only technology proposed to farmers (algalization) is
a Soil Microbiologist, ORSTOM (France), Visiting Scientist at IRRI
Paper presented at the 2nd International Conference of the
African Association for BNF - Cairo - December 1986
Notice:
The PDFS ofj journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which d
redistributioni is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute tol lists requires prior specific permissic
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.



2
conducted on a "trial and error" basis and not utilized to a noticeable extent.
Despite 50 years of research on BGA, our knowledge of their practical utilisation
has made relatively little progress because of these major reasons :
1. The imbalance between test tube and field studies
Although most
research projects on BGA sought the practical utilisation of BGA, ecological and
agronomical field studies are rare.
2. The utilization of grain yield as the only criterion in inoculation
experiments : Most experiments give no information on the environmental
characteristics, the initial level of indigenous N2-fixing BGA in the soil, the
dynamics of the algal flora during the crop cycle, the fate of inoculated BGA, their
influence on BNF and other factors involved in the yield increase. Therefore, little
is known about the factors that permit the development of a bloom of indigenous
or inoculated BGA in a fieid.
3. The underestimation of the potential of indigenous strains : Till recently,
almost all studies have placed emphasis on inoculation with foreign strains
selected in the laboratory. Little attention was given to indigenous strains (already
adapted to the environmental conditions), agricultural practices that favor their
growth, and integrated management.
Therefore, the BGA research program at IRRI has given priority to field
studies with emphasis on the occurrence of BGA in rice soils, their composition and
biomass, composition of BGA inocula, fate af inoculated BGA, changes in BGA
populations and N2-fixing activity in inoculated soils, and agricultural practices
favoring BGA growth. Major results obtained during the last two years are
summarized thereafter. Earlier studies had been summarized (Roger and
Watanabe,1982)
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CULTURES AND NATURAL SAMPLES OF N2-
FIXING BGA FROM RICE FIELDS ( Roger et al 1985, Roger et al 1986)
Seventy samples of N2-fixing BGA 1) grown in liquid medium in the
laboratory, 2) grown on soil in a greenhouse, and 3) collected from rice fields, were
studied.
Dry matter content averaged 4 %. A Fischerella sp. showed the highest value
(13%). The lowest values (< 1 %) were recorded for genera forming mucilaginous
colonies (Gloeotrichia 1 Aphenothece, Nostoc ). High variability of dry matter
content (CV : 50 to 80%) was due partly to the nature of the strain (mucilaginous
BGA have less dry matter than nonmucilaginous ones). However, high variability
was also observed between species of the same genus (Anabaena : 1.0 to 8.5% :
Nostoc : 0.28 to 6.3 % ).
Ash content of laboratory cultures averaged 7.4% of the dry weight, that of
field samples averaged 45%, ranging from 27 to 71%.
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permissi
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational vse. .



3
Nitrogen content, on ash-free basis, ranged from 1.9 to 11.8% (average 6%).
Intrageneric variability was larget CV = 20 to 42% ). N and pigment contents
decreased in aging material.
Phosphorus and N contents were positively correlated. At P contents
higher than I% there was no more increase in N content. The optimal value of 1%
was attained in laboratory cultures only. Soil-grown BGA and natural samples had
concentrations lower than 0.5%, confirt ming that P availability limits BGA growth
in natural environments.
Potassium content of the ash-free algal material collected from the field
(average: 0.5%) was similar to that of laboratory cultures, which indicates that K
availability probably does not limit BGA growth.
Muitivariate analysis showed that physiological state is at least as important
as the nature of the strain in explaining the variability of the composition.
The wide range of dry matter (0.9-7 %) and ash (27-71%) contents in field
samples shows that the weight of a bloom of BGA gives little information about its
agronomic significance. Average and extreme values of dry matter, ash, and N
contents of field samples show that N content in 1 ton of fresh N2-fizing BGA
averages 1.1 kg but may vary from 0.3 to 3.8 kg.
Algal biomass in rice fields range from a few kilograms to 58 tons fresh
weight/ha or 500 kg dry weight. N2-fixing algai biomasses range within the same
limits (Roger and Kulasooriya, 1980; Roger, 1986). Assuming a maximum biomass of
500 kg dry weight/ha and using average ash and N values obtained for artificial
blooms and field samples, the potential contribution of a BGA bloom is 14 kg N/ha.
CN values of 4.8-13 show better N availability from BGA than from
farmyard and green manures. Tirol et al. (1982) showed that N availability from
BGA to two successive rice crops was similar to that of ammonium sulfate.
ABUNDANCE OF HETEROCYSTOUS BGA IN RICE SOILS AND SOIL-BASED
INOCULA. ( Roger et al., in press a,b)
Heterocystous BGA in rice soils. The quanuitative study of the algal population
in 102 rice soils from 5 countries showed N2-fixing strains in all samples.
Heterocystous BGA comprised, on the average, 9% of the total algal population.
Their density ranged from 1 I 102 to 8 I 106 CFU/cm? ( median 6 I 104), was
higher than 103 CFU/cm? in 95% of the samples, and was positively correlated with
soil pH and available P.
Nostoc was recorded in 99% of the samples and was the dominant N2-fixing
genus in 74 % of them. Genera that form mucilaginous colonies (Nostoc *
Apbanothece) and are less susceptible to grazing (Grant et 1,1985) were dominant
in more than 90% of the soils; strains that do not form mucilaginous colonies
(Anabaena Calothriz, and Fischerella) were present in most soils but were rarely
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permiss
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.



4
dominant. This may indicate that grazing is a major limiting factor in the
development of blooms of nonmucilaginous strains active in N2-fixation.
No significant correlation was observed between the relative abundance of
the various groups of heterocystous BGA and soil physicochemical properties.
Analysis of soil-based inocula. Algae were enumerated in 22 samples of soil-
based inocula (SBI) collected from Burma, Egypt, and India and produced at IRRI.
Densities of heterocystous BGA ranged from 5 I 104 to 3 I 107 CFU/g dry weight.
Average values in multistrain and monostrain SBI were similar (2-3 I 106 CFU/g
dry weight) and about 100 times lower than in dried laboratory cultures (2 I 108
CFU/g dry weight).
The relative abundance of N2-fixing BGA in SBI was low, ranging from 3 to
32% (average 15 %). Among N2-fixing strains, Nostoc spp. were clearly dominant,
comprising an average 73% of the CFU. The two most abundant heterocystous
strains in a given inoculum accounted for an average 95% of the total counts of
heterocystous BGA, showing that multistrain SBI were rather unbalanced with
regard to the relative abundance of the various strains.
Chemical analysis showed 78-86% ash (average 80.63),2.1-4.7s C (average
3.45) * 0.2-0.8 % N (average 0.5%), and 640-1900 ppm P, indicating that SBI
contained mostly soil and only about 1% of BGA material.
Ratio between inoculated and indigenous BGA. The average density of
heterocystous BGA in SBI was 2 I 106 CFU 18 dry weight. Applying the
recommended dose of 10 kg/ha ( Venkalaraman,198l)d this inoculum brings 2 I
1011 CFU/ha or 2: I 103 CFU/cm2. This is 150 times less than the average density of
indigenous N2-fixing BGA in the soils examined (3 I 105 CFU/cm2) - The study of
the ratio of indigenous heterocystous BGA from 102 soils to inoculated
heterocystous BGA from 22 SBI showed that in 90% of the cases, indigenous BGA
in the first centimeter of soil of a one-hectare rice field were more abundant than
BGA brought by 10 kg of algal inoculum. In about 50% of the cases, the ratio of
indigenous heterocystous BGA to inoculated BGA was higher than 100.
Discussion. The study showed that multispecies SBI are unbalanced : one or two
strains, mostly the Nostoc spp. dominate. A suitable method for producing a
balanced multistrain inoculum of known quality would be to produce monospecific
inocula of various strains, evaluate their concentration in CFU after drying and mix
them accordingly.
All studied rice soils had heterocystous BGA. In most cases, the
neterocystous BGA in the quantity of SBI recommended for application were less
numerous than indigenous ones on a unit-area basis. Despite that, inoculation was
reportedly successful in soils which, according to our resuits, contained a fairly high
level of indigenous heterocystous BGA. Among other possible explanations, such a
Notice:
Thel PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, iny which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistributet to lists requires prior specific permiss
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial researcha and educational use.



5
success might be attributed to the accumulation of P by propagules of BGA
inoculum (produced with high levels of P), which gives them an initial advantage
for growth over the propagules of most often P-deficient indigenous BGA (Roger et
al, 1986). Since spore germination is photodependent ( Reddy, 1984), inoculated
propagules applied on soil surface might have better germination than the
indigenous propagules mixed with the soil. However, such hypothesis need to be
demonstrated as well as other possible ones not related to BNF.
DYNAMICS OF ALGAL POPULATIONS AND ACETYLENE REDUCING
ACTIVITY IN SOILS INOCULATED WITH BGA (Reddy and Roger, in press)
The dynamics of inoculated strains of heterocystous BGA and indigenous
algae were studied for one month in 1-m2 microplots of five soils previousiy air-
dried or oven-dried at 110 OC. Oven drying was perfor med to assess whether a
reduction of the indigenous algal population favors the establishment of inoculated
BGA. Inocutum was a mixture of dry SBI containing nonindigenous Anabaena
variabilis, Talypothrix tenuis, Aulosira fertilissime, Fischerella sp., and Nostoc sp.,
spread at 20 kg /ha. The same soils were then dried and resubmerged for two
months to study the effect of controlling algal grazers (a major limiting factor for
BGA) with neem (Atedirachte indice ) seeds on the revival and dynamics of
indigenous and inoculated algae. ARA was measured and algal populations were
enumerated for four weeks as in the first erperiment. Then soils were kept flooded
for another month and the nature and biomass of algae were then determined.
Heat treaiment markedly reduced algal populations. Survival in the soils, ranged
from 4 to 17%. Bukaryotic aigae and unicellular BGA were the most affected.
Heterocystous BGA were more resistant.
Dynamics of algal populations were similar in air-dried and oven-dried
treatments of a given soil during the month following inoculation - Heterocystous
BGA populations exhibited poor growth in soils richer in organic matter. In other
soils, they comprised a significant percentage of the total algal population and
became dominant by the 14th day of sub mersion in two soils. In most cases,
indigenous heterocystous BGA were more numerous than inoculated ones. The
ratio of CFU of indigenous to inoculated heterocystous BGA ranged from 0.1 to 840
(average 104). Only on 7 out of 40 occasions were inoculated BGA more numerous
than indigenous heterocystous BGA. This was observed with no growth or late
growth of indigenous heterocystous BGA - or after the decline of a bloom of
indigenous heterocystous BGA.
Once the soils were dried, two inoculated strains disappeared. During the first
month foilowing rewetting. heterocystous BGA growth was poor in all soils but
better in neem-treated plots than in the controls. Indigenous strains were usually
more abundant than inoculated ones. Only on 4 out of 40 occasions did inoculated
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permiss
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.



6
heterocystous BGA become more abundant than the indigenous ones. This was *
observed only after the decline of the indigenous populations of heterocystous BGA.
Establishaent of inoculated algae. Counts of inoculated BGA showed no clear
effect of oven-drying of soil or neem application on the establishment of inoculated
BGA. But strains markedly differed in ability to persist in the soils. I tenuis was
the most abundant inoculated strain in 65% of the cases. Despite a low level of
inoculation,A. fertilissima developed and persisted during the second experiment.
A. variabilis and Nostoc SL significantly multiplied during the first experiment but
disappeared during the second.
Acetylene-reducing activity (ARA) was, on the average, higher in air-dried and
in neem-treated plots than in oven-dried and non neem-treated plots, ARA was
correlated with the counts of total heterocystous BGA and indigenous heterocystous
BGA but not with the counts of inoculated BGA. This indicated that ARA.was
principally due to indigenous BGA. However, correlation coefficients were generally
higher with total heterocystous BGA than with indigenous heterocystous BGA, -
which may indicate some contribution by inoculated BGA.
BGA biomass after two months of submersion was higher in neem-ureated
plots. In 35 of 40 cases, indigenous strains of algae became dominant. However,
inoculated Afertilissime developed in two neem-treated soils and became
dominant in one where it produced a bloom corresponding to 450 kg 'dry
weight/ha (35 kg N/ha), the highest biomass recorded in a plot during this
-
experiment.
Discussion. The longer persistence of some of the strains and the late
establishment of blooms of inoculated A. lertilissima in plots of two soiis treated
with neem, where this strain developed the highest BGA biomass in the experiment,
might indicate some potential for foreign strain inoculation in rice soils. However
establishment of inoculated nonindigenous strains was infrequent in the studied
soils. This agrees with the results of Grant et al. (1985), showing the failure "of
nonindigenous inoculated BGA to establish in the field, even' when grazers were)
controlled. The results aiso confirmed the beneficial effect of neem application .on,
photodependent BNF reported by the same authors.
a
RESEARCH ON AZOLLA
W hereas BGA technology is more at an experimental level of large'field
testing, Azolle technology has been used for several centuries in China and
Vietnam. In these countries, however, environmental and economical. constraints
limited Azolla use to about 2 I 106 ha in 1983 (Roger and Watanabe, 1986). Use of
Azalla as green manure in China and Vietnam is decreasing, but interest in its use
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by,copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permjss
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.



7
as fish and animal feed, mineral scavenger, and depollutant has increased
(Liuchungchu, 1984). In other parts of Asia, Azolla technology is not beyond small-
scale trials except in South Cotabato (Philippines). In this area, high available P,
9-11 months of rainy. season, well-irrigated rice fields, and the presence of many
small ponds allowed wide adoption of A pinnata which was then replaced by a
more efficient strain of A. microphy!la ( Watanabe,1984).
Under optimum conditions (22 9C), mazimum biomass is 100 kg N /ha for A.
pinnata, 140 kg N/ha for A. Ailiculoides, (Watanabe and Berja, 1983), and 190 kg
N/ha for A. microphylle (Wa atanabe, 1986). In INSFFER trials average productivity
per Azolla crop was 1.5 kg/m2 ( about 30 kg N/ha ) before transplanting and 1.1
kg /m? after transplanting (Watanabe in press). At IRRI, the maximum biomass
was 80 kg N /ha for A. microphylla in 28 days (Watanabe, in press). Productivity
discrepancy under optimum and field conditions is due to many constraints in the
field. Technical constraints in the tropics are as follows :

1 Low temperature requirement. Optimum temperature for most species is
below the average temperature in the tropics. Cool weather is a key to successful
Azalla cultivation in Vietnam and China. High temperature and humidity result in
high pests incidence.
2) Need for P fertilizer. P is the most important nutrient (W atanabe et al,
1986)
3) Insect damage. Insect control is an important economic limitation. If more
than 200 8 carbofuran ai/ha is needed to control insects, benefits are eliminated
(Kikuchi et al,1984).
4) Year-round maintenance of inoculum. Because Azolla is multiplied
vegetatively, inoculum must be maintained in nurseries all year and multiplied for
distribution before field cultivation.
5) Need for good water control.
Research at IRRI has placed emphasis on resistance to adverse temperatures,
soil and nutritional requirements, insect pests, and availability of Azalla N to rice .
SCREENING FOR TEMPERATURE
Temperature limitations can be reduced by selecting cold or heat-tolerant
. - strains (W atanabe and Berja, 1983). Among strains tested.at. IRRI.A.mivophyla
#418 was most tolerant of high temperature 379C day/292 C night (unpublished). -
SOIL PROPERTIES AND AZOLLA GROWTH
AZolla adaptability, in soils of. the Philippines (Callo-et a1,1985).. A growth
test in 972 Philippine sites used local soil in pots without fertilizer addition and 6
/ A. pinnata fronds previously starved by 7 days of growth on tapwater. Doubling
time was estimated after 14 days. Soils were classified as highly suitable when
$
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which Ca
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute tol lists requires prior specific permissio
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-comgercial research and educational use.



8
Azolla doubling time was less than 3.5 days : moderately suitable with a doubling
time of 3.5 to 5.0 days; and nonsuitable with a doubling time longer than 5 days.
Doubling time was less than 5 days in 40% of the samples growing under full
sunlight and 34% of those growing in the shade. It was less than 3.5 days in 13% of
the samples in full sunlight and 8% of those growing in the shade. Without P
fertilisation, only limited areas have soils suitable for Azolla growth.
Soil available P and Azolle growth (Watanabe and Ramirez, 1984). The
productivity, N content, and P content of Azolla grown on 29 soils from 4
Philippine sites were studied with regard to the soil available P and P sorption
capacity. Using simultaneously data on available P and P sorption capacity, it was
possible to calculate a discriminate function separating soils according to their
Azolla productivity. Resuits showed that A. pinnata grows satisfactorily without P
application in soils with Olsen P values higher than 30 mg/kg and P sorption
capacity lower than 1500 mg P205/100 g. Such conditions are rare in rice soils and"
P. fertilization for Azolla growth usually is needed. None of the other analyzed soil
properties (total C, total N, and erchangeable K, Ca, and Mg) correlated with Azolla
productivity.
AZOLLA RESPONSE TO P,K, AND Zn IN VARIOUS SOILS, IN RELATION TO
FLOODWATER CHEMISTRY (Ali and Watanabe, 1986)
The supply of P,K, and Zn to Azolla from flooded soils and the kinetics of P,
K, and Zn in floodwater were studied in pots, using 11 Philippine rice soils, ranging
from loamy sand to clay (pH range : 4.7 - 7.7). Treatments were a control ( no
fertilization), PK, KZn, PLn, and PKZn applied just before Amolla inoculation. Azolle
was harvested 3 weeks after inoculation.
Phosphorus concentration in the floodwater of P fertilized soils decreased
rapidly and became similar to that in the control within a week. Phosphate in
floodwater 1 week after Azalla inoculation was correlated with soil Oisen P (r =
0.83), except for one soil. Phosphate application did not increase P content in Azolla
at harvest. The K and Zn contents of Azolla at harvest increased with K and Zn
application. In two soils, Azolla biomass was lower in the treatments without K or
Zn than in the PKZn treatment, but Azalla analysis showed no K or Zn deficiency.
Azolla biomass ranged from 9 to 53 8 dry weight/m2 and N content from -
2.1 to 5.2%. Azolla N was highly correlated with dry weight (r . 0.953). Dry
weight and N were highly correlated with P content (r = 0.63-0.55), but not with K
or Zn, indicating that P supply limited Azolla growth. The critical level of P in
Azalla was about 0.15%. Floodwater P was better correlated with Azalle P (r =
0.739) one week after Azalla inoculation than at 2 or 3 weeks. When floodwater
P at 1 week was less than 0.1 ppm, Azolla was P deficient. When floodwater P was,
more than 0.4 ppm, P supply toAzolla was sufficient.
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute tol lists requires prior specific permissi
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial. research and educational use.
A



9
PHOSPHATE APPLICATION
Surveys of N and P contents in fieid-grown Azolla showed a threshold value
of P deficiency of 0.4% P in Azolle (dry weight basis). When Azolla P was higher
than 0.4%, N content was about 4% dry weight (Watanabe and Ramirez, 1984; Ali
and Watanabe, 1986). About 80% of Azolla samples collected from fieids and
ponds in the Philippines had less than 0.4% P and 4% N (unpublished). Application
of P can increase Azolla growth under economically feasible conditions, especially
split application of superphosphate which can increase N gains of Azolla by 4.6 8
N/g P (Watanabe et al., 1980). Recent data from A microphylla showed 10 8 N/g P
(unpublished).
Application of P to the inoculum permits its multiplication without P
application in the main field until it becomes deficient (P40.2%). P-enriched
inoculum may be used for rapidly producing a large Amalle biomass (unpublished).
EFFECT OF N FERTILIZER
In the absence of competing organisms, BNF by Azalla is more tolerant of
combined N than that by free-living microorganisms. Azolla ARA was reduced by
about 50% by 10 mM urea-N or ammonium-N and 25 mM of nitrate-N, whereas a
24-hr exposure to 1mM ammonium-N completely repressed ARA in free-living BGA
(Ito and. Watanabe, 1983). ln. situ however, competing aquatic plants growing at the
erpense of foodwater N, may hinder Azolla growth. In the presence of green algae,
1.4 mM ammonium-N inhibited A. pinnate growth by 60% (Watanabe et al., 1977).
The Azalla canopy prevents light from penetrating the floodwater, inhibits
the growth of other phototrophs, and depresses photodependent CO2 uptake. Thus,
the floodwater pH is lower than in Amollafree conditions. Azolla may therefore be
expected to reduce N losses by ammonia volatilization.
Using the delta 15N technique and Lemae minor as non N2-fixing control, the
contribution of BNF to N of A.micropby!la grown on two soils was estimated to be
70-100% (Yoneyama et al, in press).
AZOLLA INSECT PESTS (Mochida et al.in press)
Five Diptera (Chiranomus arassiforceps, C javanus, Ckiiensis, Polypedilum
anticum, and R suturalis!, one Coleoptera (Nanophyes sp.), and four Lepidoptera
Ephestiopsis vishau webworm) and three species of Elophila (caseworms were
recorded as Azolla pests in the Philippines. The life cycle of the webworm and
three caseworms were studied, and their populations were monitored at IRRI
using light traps and counts on A. microphylla and A. pinnata. At 27 9C, Klophila
life cycle is about 31-32 days and Epbestiopsis : about 20 days. The standing
biomass of A. microphylla (IRRI No. 418) averaged 1.0 kg fresh weight/m2 in
insecticide-treated plots and 0.7 kg/m2 in untreated plots. That of A. pinnala (No.
Notice:
Thel PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which C
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permissic
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for) your personal, non-commercial researcha and educational use.



10
5) averaged 0.7 kg/m2 in insecticide-treated plots and 0.45 /m2 in untreated plots.
Webworm larval and pupal populations in untreated plots averaged 146/m2 on A.
microphylla and 135/m2 on A. pinnata. Caseworm populations on the same strains
averaged 57 and 48/m2. respectively. Azolla yield loss due to these insects ranged
from 6 to 64 % for A. microphylla and from 13 to 57% for A. pinnata Although
pesticide application was effective for controlling insect pests, no method is yet
economically feasible.
AVAILABILITY OF AZOLLA NITROGEN TO RICE (Ito and Watanabe, 1985)
Decomposition of Azolle in water and soil in relation to the availability of
Azolla N to rice plants was determined using 15N 8s a tracer. When Azolle was
placed on the surface of flooded soils, about 66% of its N was lost within 6 weeks.
Losses were about 30% when Azolla was incorporated. Rice plants grown in a pot
absorbed 50% of N from Azolla incorporated at transplanting and less than 10% of
N from Azolla kept on the water surface. In the field, N availability from
incorporated Azolle was higher than that from Azalla placed at the soil surface.
However, N availability from incorporated Azolla (12-27%) was much lower than
that in a pot. With late application, 78 days after transplanting, Azolle
contribution to grain N was higher than with application 30 or 53 days after
transplanting.
BIOFERTILIZER GERMPLASM
As part of its BNF program, IRRI has collected a large germplasm of N2-fixing
organisms, and currently acts as an international center for Azolla germplasm
collection and distribution. IRRI maintains the largest collection of Azolla (168
strains from 7 species and 4 Anabaena-free species) and of blue-green algae (
about 200 strains ) isolated from rice fields. A large number of N2-fixing bacteria
are aiso preserved. Hundred of strains of these organisms have been given to
laboratories all over the world.
CONCLUSION
Studies on BGA show the presence of indigenous strains in all soiis, and the
usual poor establishment of inoculated foreign strains. Attention should therefore
be given to agricultural practices that enhance the growth of indigenous strains
which are already adapted to the environmental conditions and can also be utilized
for producing inocula, Studies on Azolla confirm that P is a key factor. insecticide
and P application to an inoculum of a selected strain might be an economical
management, per mitting Azolla multiplication in the field without further P and
insecticide application.
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which d
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permissic
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.



11
ACKNOVLEDGMENTS. Part of this research was conducted under a scientific
agreement between IRRI and ORSTOM (France) and supported by the United
Nations Development Programme.
REFERENCES CITED /
MAli S, Watanabe I(1986) Response of Azolla to P, K, and Zn in different wetland rice
soils in relation to chemistry of floodwater, Soil Sci Plant Nutr 32. (2).239-253..
dEallo DP, Dilag RT, Necessario RS, Wood DM, Tagalog FC, Gapasin DP, Ramirez CM,
[Wa atanabe I (1985) A 14-day Azolla adaptability test on farmer's fields. Philipp
10
J
Crop.Sci (3) 129-133.
Grant IF, Roger PA, Watanabe I. 1985. Effect of grazer regulation and algal
inoculation on photodependent nitrogen fixation in a wetland rice field. Biol Fert
Soils 1:61-72.
Mto 0, Watanabe (1983) The relationship between combined nitrogen uptake and
nitrogen fixation in Azoll-Anebaena: symbiosis. New Phytol 95 : 647-654.
Nio0, Watanabe I(1985) Availability to rice plants of nitrogen fixed by Azolla. Soil
Sci Plant Nutr 31 (1)91-104.
Mkikuchi M, Watanabe I, Haws LD (1984) Economic evaluation of Azolla use in rice
production. pp 569-592 in Organic Matter and Rice. International Rice Research
Institute, PO Box 933, Manila, Philippines.
MMLiuchungchu (1984) Recent advances in Azolla research. pp 45-54 in Silver WS,
ySçhfoeder EC ed, Practical application of Azolla for rice production. Martinus Nijhoff.
Pw Mochida 0, Yoshiyasu Y, Dimaano D. Insect pests on Azolla in the Philippines.in
Use of Azolla. International Rice Research Institute, PO Box 933 Manila, Philippines
( in press).
Reddy PM. 1984. Role of chromatic lights in germination of the spores of blue-green
algae. Arch Hydrobiol Suppl 67 : 299-304.
Reddy PM, Roger PA Dynamics of algal populations and acetylene reducing activity
in five soils inoculated with blue-green aigae. Biol Fert Soils (in press).
Roger PA (1986) Effect of algae and aquatic macrophytes on nitrogen dynamics in
wetland rice fields. Paper presented at the Congress of the International Soil
Science Society, Hambourg, Germany, August 13-21 1986.
Roger PA, Kulasooriya SA (1980) Blue-green algae and rice. International Rice
Research Institute, PO Box 933, Manila, Philippines. 112 p.
Roger PA, Watanabe I (1982) Research on algae, blue-green algae and phototrophic
nitrogen fixation at the International Rice Research institute (1961-1981) :
summarization, problems, and prospects. IRRI Research Paper Series no 78, 21 p,
International Rice Research Institute, Po Bor 933, Manila, Philippines.
Roger PA, Watanabe I (1986) Technologies for utilizing biological nitrogen fixation
in lowiand rice : potentialities, current usage, and limiting factors. Fert Res 9: 39-77
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permiss
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.



1
12
Roger PA, Santiago-Ardales S, Watanabe I (1985) Unicellular mucilaginous blue-
green algae : impressive blooms but deceptive biofertilizers. Int Rice Res Newsl
10(2) 27-28.
Roger PA, Tirol A, Ardales S, We atanabe I (1986) Chemical composition of cultures
and natural samples of N2-fixing blue-green algae from rice fields. Bioi Fert Soils 2
131-146
Roger PA, Kannayian S, Reddy PM. Abundance of nitrogen-fizing blue-green algaé
in some rice soils from India, Phykos (in press, a).
Roger P A, Santiago-Ardales S, Reddy P M, Watanabe I. The abundance of
heterocystous blue-green algae in rice soils and inocula used for application in rice
fields. Biol Fert Soilst in press, b).
-
Roger PA, Santiago- Ardales S, Watanabe I. Nitrogen-fixing blue-green algae in rice
soils of northern Luzon (Philippines). Phil Agric (in press, c).
Roger PA, Voggesberger M, Margraf J (1986d) Nitrogen fixing phototrophic
organisms in Ifugao rice terraces ( Philippines ). Phil Agric (in press, d).
Tirol AC, Roger PA, Watanabe I (1982) Fate of nitrogen from a blue-green alga in a
flooded rice soil. Soil Sci Plant Nutr 28:559-570
Venkataraman GS. 1981. Blue-green algae for rice production. A manual for its
promotion. FAO Soil Bull. no 46.102 p.
Watanabe I (1984) Use of symbiotic and free-living blue-green algae in rice
culture. Outlook Agric 13: 166-192.
Watanabe I(1985) Limiting factors in increasing N2-fixation in rice fields: pp 436-
453 in Biological nitrogen fixation in Africa, Ssali H and Keya SO eds, Univ'or
Nairobi Kenya. 540 p.
Watanabe I. Summarized report of INSFFER Azalla trials. in Use of Azolla.
International Rice Research Institute, POBOI 933 Manila; Philippines ( in press).
( Watanabe I, Berja (1983) The growth of four species of Azolla as affected by
temperature. Aquatic Botany 15 : 175- 185.
WW atanabe I, Berja . Del Rosario DC(1980) Growth of Azolla in paddy fields as
affected by phosphorus fertilizer. Soil Sci Plant_Nutr 26 : 301-307.
WWatanabe I, Ramirez CM (1984) Relation between soil phosphorus availability and
Azolla growth. Soil Sci Plant Nutr 30 (4) 595-598.
Watanabe I, Roger PA (1984) Nitrogen fization in wetland rice field. pp 237-276 in
Subba Rao. Current Development in Biological Nitrogen Fixation.Oxford and IBH pub.
a W atanabe I, Espinas CR, Berja NS, Alimagno BV ( 1977) Utilization of Azolle-
Anebmenecomplez as a nitrogen fertilizer for rice. IRRI Research Paper Series n911.
International Rice Research Institute, POBor 933 Manila, Philippines.
Watanabe I, Roger PA, Ladha JK (1986) Problems in application of biological
dinitrogen fixation in wetland rice. Paper presented at the INSFFER Planning
Meeting-Workshop. Hangzhou, China, September 22-24. 23 p.
Woneyama T, Ladha JK, Watanabe I (1987) Nodule bacteroid and Anabaena: natural
15N enrichment in the legume-Rhimbiua: and Azolla-Anabaent symbiotic systems.
J Plant Physiol( in press).
Notice:
The PDFS of journal articles and other documents tha IRRI Library provides, may be protected by copyright Law, in which
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post to: servers. or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permis
copyright holder. This documents is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.