Twelfth Ministerial Session of the World Food Council

The Hunger Project
First Annual Tanco Memorial Lecture

17 June 1986, Rome

SUSTAINABLE NUTRITION SECURITY
IN AFRICA: LESSONS FROM ASIA

Dr. M. S&S. Swaminathan
Director General, International Rice Research Institute

I feel privileged to have been asked by The Hunger Project to
deliver the first Arturo Tanco Memorial Lecture on the occasion of the
Twelfth Ministerial Session of the World Food Council. The fact that
two great organizations, one devoted to the mobilization of the public
for fighting hunger, and the other, committed to the generation of
political priority for food security, have joined to commemorate the
memory of the late Arturo Tanco is evidence of the admiration and
affection he enjoyed among a wide cross section of the global community.

I have had the privilege of knowing Minister Tanco since 1971,
having worked with him for three years in his capacity as Vice-Chairman
of the Board of Trustees of IRRI. When I. first met him in 1971, he was
full of ideas for making the Philippines, then a rice importing country,
into a rice exporting nation. He launched a multipronged drive to
achieve this purpose. First, he accorded priority to farm science and
technology. Not only did he try to convert the best material and
knowledge available at the International Rice Research Institute into a
meaningful extension and production program, but he also promoted the
growth of a strong national agricultural research system. He helped to
establish the Philippine Council of Agricultural Research (now known as
the Philippine Council of Agriculture and Resources Research and
Development). He knew that marginal improvements in yield do not elicit
‘an enthusiastic response from farmers. He, therefore, designed a
production program called MASAGANA 99 that specifies a yield target of
99 cavans per ha or nearly 5 tons of unmilled rice per ha. The average
yield of unmilled rice in the Philippines in the early 70s was 1.57
u/fha. What Arturo Tanco was trying to achieve was. to make the farming
community aware of the opportunities available for trebling the average
yield. MASAGANA 99 was an integrated program using a package of

technology, services, and supporting government policies. This
technological package was broken into 16 discrete steps which could
easily be followed by farmers easily. At the time Minister Tanco

relinquished the position of Minister of Agriculture of the Philippines,
rice yield had gone up to 2.49 t/ha.

NOTICE .
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Arturo Tanco was both a unique Filipino and a universal man. He
gave his time generously for causes he considered important for human
happiness. You are aware of his contributions to the World Food
Council. He wanted this forum to become the equivalent of the UN
Security Council as far as food security is concerned. He regarded the
security of input supply as basic to food security and hence spearheaded
the establishment of a Fertilizer Commission by FAO. Having
accomplished a rapid growth in food production in his native land, he
believed that the time had come to fight hunger elsewhere. This
triggered his commitment to the cause which The Hunger Project serves.
Toward the end of his life, Tanco had wanted The Hunger Project to take
its mission and message -- "ending hunger - an idea whose time has come"
-- to Africa. This then is the rationale for the topic chosen for the
first Arturo Tanco Memorial Lecture.

The tropical, mountainous, island geography of the Philippines
provides both economic opportunities and potential for ecological
problems. The archipelego of more than 7,100 islands encompasses
approximately 30 million ha of land area, 1.1 million ha of coastal
wetlands, 26.6 million ha of coastal waters (of which 4 million ha are
coral reefs) and has 18,000 km of coast line. Because of scarcity of
arable land, the only pathways open to the Philippines for feeding its
growing population are higher yield per hectare and more crops per year.
Tanco's food production strategy, hence, aimed to achieve higher
production through greater productivity and intensity of cropping. This
is a trend witnessed in most countries of Asia from the early 1960s
(Fig. 1); in contrast, the per capita food production in many countries
in Africa has been declining (Fig. 2).

Twenty years ago, several food experts had predicted for many
countries of Asia and Latin America a situation similar to that
witnessed in parts of Africa. In fact, Paul and William Paddock, in
their famous book "Famine 1975," predicted that my country, India,
cannot be saved from hunger and famine. India was classified as a
hopeless case. Today, India has over 30 million tonnes of grain
reserves. China, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Indonesia, and several other
Asian countries were also regarded as nations unable to feed themselves
but they all have made spectacular progress. How did this happen and
why is it that we do not see a similar trend in Africa?

4

THE AFRICAN OPPORTUNITY

Africa is a continent with a wide diversity of agricultural conditions and accomplishments. The British economist,. Joan Robinson, once
wrote that whatever one writes about India, the opposite could also be
true, depending on the area visited. This observation aliso applies to
Africa. Countries like Egypt have production program like MABRUK 4 that
aim to produce 4 tonnes of rice per acre or 10 tonnes per ha. At the
other end of the spectrum, several countries in the Sahel region hardly
produce 500 kg/ha of sorghum or millet. In contrast, American farmers
obtain a yield of 8 to 10 tonnes per ha.

; NOTICE ,
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Ethiopia is often described as a country with "13 months of
sunshine.” Agriculture is essentially a solar energy harvesting
enterprise. Why then should countries with abundant sunshine throughout
the year have low productivity while countries with freezing
temperatures and heavy snowfall for almost half a year have such high
yields? How did Asia get out of the low yield trap? Answers to such
questions will help in designing programs for sustainable agricultural
progress.

I would like to deal with some of these questions based on
experiences in India, China, Indonesia, Pakistan, and other Asian
countries. :

However, before I discuss my major thesis, let me just say that the
following five elements of the Addis Ababa Strategy developed by the
leaders of African nations in July 1985 are very similar to those
introduced by several Asian nations 20 years ago:

aad

© 1. To guarantee remunerative prices to producers and to make
credit, inputs and marketing facilities available;

2. To expand irrigation facilities and to have better water
management and control in drought-prone areas;

3. To strengthen national research and extension capabilities;

4, To increase the flow of resources to agriculture, by devoting
at least 204 of public investment to the farm sector; and

5. To establish and maintain adequate grain reserves for
achieving food security.

The detailed paper prepared by the Organization of African Unity
for consideration during the May 1986 Special Session of the UN General
© Assembly on Africa's Economic and Social Crisis brings out very clearly
all the technical, social, economic, and political factors responsible
for the food crisis.

It is particularly gratifying .that the Special General Assembly
Session unanimously adopted a Programme of Action for African Economic
‘Recovery and Development for 1986-1990. Africa's priority program for
agricultural recovery indicates the following short term and medium term
objectives: )

1. Immediate measures
e To create and sustain national emergency preparedness;
e To institute effective early-warning systems;

e To establish flexible and efficient regional networks of
crop protection agencies;

e To establish national food security arrangements.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.

2. Medium-term measures

‘@ To raise substantially the level of investment in
agriculture;

e To increase food production;

e To restore, protect and develop arable land and
render it more productive;

e To establish remunerative produce pricing policies,
establish and strengthen incentive schemes,
eliminate pricing policies that have tended to discourage
production, and provide effective agriculture credit
programs;

e To develop livestock and livestock products through the
utilization of agriculture byproducts, improvement of
management, and giving attention to animal diseases; ©

e To develop mechanization and promote the use of modern farm
and processing machinery; increase the use of fertilizers,
improved seeds and pesticides;

e To improve and expand the storage capacity, distribution
and marketing system;

e To develop agricultural research and extension through
the creation of a network of agronomical research stations
and extension agencies to design and diffuse appropriate
agricultural technologies;

e To place at the small farmer's disposal necessary
inputs for increased yields; effect better utilization and
‘improvement in management of water resources and the ©
establishment of low-cost irrigation schemes;

e To establish reforestation and drought and
desertification control. programs, including firewood
schemes; improve agricultural implement maintenance
capacity;

@ To establish assistance programs for small farmers,
especially women food producers and rural youth;

e To improve the distribution of agricultural products.

A particularly welcome development is the commitment of donor
nations to give long-term assistance. The Africa 2000 Program of Canada
is an excellent example of the growing recognition that ecological and
agricultural rehabilitation efforts must be viewed in an integrated
manner. Degraded lands should be upgraded first with the help of
suitable techniques before they are planted to annual crops. Also,

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Africa's unique wild life endowments must be preserved. Unfortunately
due to short-term pressures, the habitats of wild life are being brought
under agricultural or pastoral management. The conservation of African
wild life, through biosphere reserves and national parks, is both
ecologically necessary and economically wise. Such a long-term vision
requires long-term resources. I hope one immediate result of the UN
Special Session on Africa will be the commitment of both the national
governments and bilateral and multilateral donors to provide the
necessary financial, technical, and commodity resources at least toward
the end of the century.

CONTRASTING CHARACTERISTICS OF ASIA AND AFRICA

It is rather ironic that at the time the book "Famine 1975" which
recommended the practice of triage for three quarters of a billion of
people of Asia was published, Africa was not considered as having a food
problem. In fact sub-Saharan Africa, formerly a food exporting region
became a net food importer in the 70s. By the mid-80s, the rate of
growth of net food imports was still rising. FAO's Special Report on
the food supply situation and crop prospect in sub-Saharan Africa of
April 1986 indicates that the medium-term outlook shows no sign of
relief, but rather suggests the likelihood of further deterioration.
Recent FAO projections reached the alarming conclusion that by 1990 the
self-sufficiency ratio for low-income Africa could decrease from.79% to —
75% compared to a decade before. In contrast, the ratio in Asia is
expected to rise from 94% to 984. If this projection materializes,
African countries will be even more dependent on food imports by 1990.

In contrast to a decline in food production, the production of
export crops has increased. As Lofchie (1975) states, "These two
aspects of African agricultural performance can be identified as
Africa's paradox; a continent, unable to produce sufficient food to
provide the majority of its citizens with even barely a minimal diet,
has been able to record sharp increases in its annual production of
agricultural goods destined for external markets."

The bright spots of African agriculture are not confined to the
perennial export crops such as smallholder cocoa, coffee, oil palm, and
tea. Annual crops such-’as cotton and groundnut have had periods of

‘rapid growth when they were properly supported by public services and
policies. Hybrid maize varieties have had a sweeping impact in wide
areas of East Africa where key institutional and policy complements were
available. In less known parts of West Africa, soil and rainfall
analysis indicates a hospitable environment for the modernization of
agriculture. The sharp turnaround in the smallholder food sector of
Asia from the 1960s to the 1970s, often under difficult conditions,has
implications for Africa and are not to be dismissed lightly (Mellor,
Delgado and Blackie, 1986). Spreading the circumference of such bright
spots is our immediate task.

The task ahead is formidable. In the mid-80s, sub-Saharan Africa
was the only major nation of the world whose population growth rate was
still increasing while per capita food production was declining. The

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
rate of rural to urban migration has been high in the 1960s and 1970s,
growing at over 6.5% per annum (World Bank, 1981). As had been stressed
in several UNEP reports, rising human populations, with expanded food
needs, put great pressure on the stabilizing elements in the ecosystem
structure such as perennial vegetation, stable water table, adequate
stream flow, and fertile soil profiles. When drought strikes, such
overworked land is unable to protect itself. Prolonged drought is not
the only cause of desertification. Deforestation, overgrazing,
overcultivation, poor irrigation, and unscientific land use practices
are also important contributors. Desertification has continued to
spread at the same rate as in 1977 when a UN conference developed a plan
to combat desertification -- as much as 6 million ha per year. It now
threatens 35% of the continent's land surface and 20% of its population.

The fragility of soils, diversity of crops and pests, variability
of climate, and scarcity of water characteristic of many countries south
of the Sahara -- all make it imperative to develop ecologically sound
technologies adapted to local socio-economic conditions. A conservative
estimate indicates that 75% of the food grown and eaten in Africa is ©
produced predominantly by women on small landholdings of less than 2 ha.
Unfortunately, so far, most extension and development projects have
bypassed women. Experts agree that hunger is primarily a _ rural
phenomenon in Africa although because of the unplanned migration of the
rural poor to towns and cities, there is a rising tendency for
malnutrition in urban areas. The relation between production and
consumption is much more direct in several parts of Africa than in most
of Asia where food production affects the poor primarily through its
effects on rural employment and prices. We therefore need a strategy
that will deal with the problems of production, trade, and consumption
in an integrated manner. : .

The Asian agricultural scene is, in many respects, different.
Monsogn Asia has a reasonably good rainfall. The scope for groundwater
use is considerable in many countries. Also, crops like rice and wheat
occupy large areas and the organization of production programs like ©
MASAGANA 99 is relatively easy. The soils in general are fertile and
rural infrastructure is developed. Marketing is better organized and
some form of balance between producer and consumer policies has been
achieved in several COUNCELOE «

3

SUSTAINABLE NUTRITION SECURITY

Let me briefly refer to the major components of a sustainable
nutrition security plan for Africa. 1 prefer the term "nutrition
security" to "food security" because it helps to focus attention on all
the components essential for giving every human being an opportunity to
express his or her innate genetic potential. The following are the
major components of a national nutrition security system (Swaminathan,
1984):

1. Food security, resulting in adequacy and stability of food
supplies and economic and physical access to food, as described by FAO.
NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides,.may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.

2. Drinking water security, resulting in a reduction in intestinal
infection and in the incidence of diarrhea, hepatitis, etc.

3. Minimum income security, giving to all human beings the requisite purchasing power for balanced nutrition. Depending upon needs and
possibilities, steps to ensure minimum income security may take the form
of “food—-for-work" and "food-for-development" programs for unskilled and
skilled labour, and crop and livestock insurance for small farmers and
sharecroppers, midday meal and supplementary feeding programs for
children and various other forms of social security measures for both
economically underprivileged farmers and consumers. The rights to food
and to work have to become correlated rights. Developing countries
cannot afford the advanced social security measures adopted by developed
countries. Nevertheless, they have to realize that freedom from hunger
can be achieved only by winning the battle against unemployment.

4, Nutrition intervention, leading to the protection of old and
infirm persons, preschool children and pregnant and nursing mothers from
undernutrition and malnutrition. Nutrition intervention programs may
also take the form of oral administration of vitamin A and other special
programs to cater to specific needs.

5. Nutrition education, culminating in a widespread understanding
that every family and every local community can and should solve through
a malady-remedy analysis the problems of malnutrition affecting them.

6. Population stabilization, leading to a proper balance between
population growth and resource availability which is essential for
improving the quality of life including nutrition. Hence, population
education and stabilization programs have to become an integral part of
a national nutrition security action plan.

FOOD PRODUCTION STRATEGIES: THE EXPERIENCE OF INDIA

The first step is the development of an agricultural balance sheet
in each country, indicating the strengths and weaknesses in the farm
sector. A production strategy to be successful must capitalize on the
strengths of a production system and at the same time minimize its
‘weaknesses. The weaknesses of the production base in many African
countries have already been pointed out in seminars, symposia, and
publications. For example, 44% of Africa's land is desert, arid, or
semiarid; 18% has low fertility, and 22% has shallow depth and excess
vaater. In areas with excess water, several health problems arise from
the incidence of vector-borne diseases such as schistosomiasis and
malaria. The data in Table 1 gives a comparative picture of the soil
resources of different nations.

Only 6 countries account for 70 percent of all irrigated land in
Africa. With the exception of Sudan, Madagascar, and Nigeria, irrigated
agriculture has a minor place in the economies of the sub-Saharan
countries. Of the 2.64 million ha of modern irrigation developed in the
sub-Saharan Africa, Sudan alone accounts for nearly two-thirds of the
NOTICE

The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
total at 1.7 million ha. Similarly, out of 2.38 million ha of
small-scale or traditional irrigation practised in the region,
Madagascar and Nigeria (800,000 ha each) account for slightly over
two-thirds of the area.

As to be expected, irrigated area as a percentage of a country's
area under temporary and permanent crops varies tremendously from one
African nation to another. For example, nearly all the cropped land in
Egypt is irrigated but in contrast countries like Angola, Central
African Republic, Gabon, Togo, and Zambia, less than 0.3 percent of
cropped land was under irrigation in 1982. The data in Table 2 provides
a glimpse of the variability.

The water potential of sub-Saharan Africa is also’ very limited
(Table 3). Compounding these problems is deforestation (Table 4).
Obviously, soil and water conservation and management and afforestation
programs deserve the highest priority. To promote food production on a
sustainable basis, we need mutually supportive packages of technology,
services, and public policies. I will deal with each of them briefly,
based on the experience gained in India.

l. Package of technology

Farming systems and practices have evolved over the centuries and
what are usually referred to as traditional systems of farming are those
which have evoived through observation and experience to suit specific
agro-ecological conditions. Such systems of farming are, however,
generally not intended to raise crops or farm animals for the market...
When the process of modernization sets in, the principal catalyst is the
opportunity for remunerative marketing. When food crops are grown for
the market, the distinction between them and traditional cash crops
disappears. For example, in several parts of India, -wheat or rice is
the principal cash crop for numerous farming families.

Market-oriented agriculture succeeds only with a high degree of
efficiency both at the production and postharvest stages. The goal is
to achieve the highest yield possible per unit of land, water, time, and
labor. This is where improved technologies become essential.

During the first 20 years after India's independence, production
advances were achieved largely by increasing the area under cultivation.
With the pressure of a growing population, this pathway of increasing
production could only lead to a blind alley. Improved productivity and
wore intensified cropping became necessary to produce the food needed
for the growing population.

One of the first tasks, therefore, involved the building of
scientific infrastructure to stimulate and sustain rapid agricultural
advence. Agriculture is, by and large, a location-specific vocation;
hence, a dynamic national research system is a must for sustaining a
dynamic production program. )

, NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
India is fortunate to have an excellent network of agricultural
research institutes and universities. At the national level, the Indian
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) supports and coordinates
scientific research, training, and extension education in crop
husbandry, horticulture, animal husbandry, fisheries, and agro-forestry.
ICAR is a unique organization since it has dual responsibilities for
both research and education. Unfortunately, in most developing
countries, the responsibilities for research, extension, and education
are divided among different agencies and ministries.

Research programs in India are carried out in a large number of
central and state research institutes and national bureaus such as the
National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning and National Bureau
of Plant Genetic Resources. Linking these agricultural universities and
central institutes are the All-India Coordinated Research Projects.
These projects bring together scientists working in different
institutions and disciplines into a symbiotic partnership. The individual strengths of the different. research institutes may vary, but the

© collective strength of the All-India Coordinated Research Projects is
considerable. Once improved technologies are developed by scientists,
verification of the experimental findings in farmers’ fields becomes
essential before they are recommended for widespread adoption.

ICAR has developed the following methods of demonstrating and
verifying new experimental findings in farmers’ fields:

a. "Lab to Land" program which aims at extending new
experimental findings to the smail farmers;

b. National demonstrations which are designed to showcase the
high yielding farms in the community; and

c. Whole-village or watershed operational research projects which

can help identify the major constraints responsible for the
© gap between potential and actual farm income.

Since illiteracy is still widespread, ICAR organised Farm Science
Centers (Krishi Vigyan Kendra) all over the country for disseminating
the latest technical skills through a "learning by doing" scheme.

The personnel policies of a research organization are extremely
important in attracting and retaining a dedicated and high quality
staff. Im 1974, ICAR introduced an Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
for the purpose of providing job security and opportunities for
sromotion even without the occurrence of vacancies. A National Academy
of Agricultural Research Management was set up in Hyderabad to provide
opportunities for in-service training to the members of the ARS as well
as to promote scientific culture within the organization,

Agricultural research institutions and universities have identified
themselves with the farmers, and farmers often spend many hours visiting
the experimental fields and discussing with scientists problems of
mutual interest.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.

10

Technology development has been based not only on individual
factors of production but also on the farming systems as a whole. In
summary, the ICAR has been able to achieve the following:

a. Bring about a close integration of research, training, and
extension education;

b. Develop a national grid of cooperative experiments bringing
together scientists from different disciplines into a working
partnership to achieve specific research goals;

c. Bring about close linkages between research and development
agencies;

d. Involve farmers as partners in the testing and refinement of
technologies; and

e. Introduce personnel policies to promote lifelong specialization in specific areas and attend to staff problems in
remote and often neglected areas.

Let me give two examples of how the research system responded to a
specific challenge. After Independence, fertilizer production began
within the country with the establishment of fertilizer factories, both
in the private and public sectors (See Ramaswamy 1985, for a comprehensive review). Fertilizer use in farmers’ wheat fields was started using
low doses of about 20 kg of nitrogen per hectare in the 1950s. Studies
showed that there was no economic response to this low level of nitrogen
application. Hence in the early 1960s, research on the breeding of
varieties which could respond well to water and fertilizer application
was started. The semidwarf wheat varieties from Mexico containing the
Norin genes for dwarfing introduced through the help of Dr. N. E.
Borlaug, provided suitable strains which could respond well to good soil
fertility management. A National Demonstration Program was started in
1964-65 to show new opportunities for improving productivity by using
management-responsive varieties. A small government program was soon
converted into a mass movement by farmers and as a result, the area
planted to semidwarf varieties increased tremendously from about 4 ha in
1964 to about 4 million ha in 1971... From a peak production of about 12
million tonnes in 1964-° before the introduction of high yielding
‘varieties, wheat production in 1986 exceeded 46 million tonnes.

The progress made by India in wheat production is well known and I
do not wish to repeat all the known facts. However, it is important to
sealize that if a dynamic national research system with the capacity to
derive maximum benefit from international research centers like the
International Maize and Wheat Research Institute (CIMMYT) in Mexico had
not existed, it would not have been possible to make such rapid
propress.

The next example that I would like to take is rice. Rice accounts
for about 40% of the total food grain production in the country. Milled
tice production has increased from 20.6 million tonnes in 1950-51 to
60.10 million tonnes in 1983-84. During 1985-86, rice production is
NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
11

expected to range from 61.5 to 62.0 million tonnes. Here again,
production was stagnant until the introduction of genetic strains in the
mid-sixties. The new strains are able to respond to good soil fertility
and water management. Rice is predominantly a crop of the southwest
monsoon period (i.e., May to October) when pest problems together with
water control difficulties make it hard to increase yield. Fortunately,
the All-India Coordinated Rice Research Project of ICAR, which works in
partnership with the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),
helped to provide location-specific varieties and technologies for
different parts of the country. Here again, the trigger for rapid
progress was provided by the semi~dwarf, management responsive rice
varieties introduced with the help of £IRRI. Because of new
technologies, nontraditional rice areas like the Punjab and
nontraditional rice seasons like the summer season became important in
rice production. Even in severe drought, Punjab has’ maintained high
rice yields because the government provided adequate energy to pump
water from the tubewells.

To sustain yields at high and stable levels, we need effective
monitoring and early warning systems, particularly with regard to soil
conditions, and plant and animal health. In agriculture, we are dealing
with dynamic conditions and constant vigilance is necessary. To cite an
example, hardly any economic response to phosphorus application was
observed in the Punjab in the 60s. In the early 70s, however,
phosphorus application became a must to obtain substantial returns from
applied nitrogen. In a few years, zinc deficiency became widespread.
Thus, when farming practices shift from low to high productivity levels,
several new problems relating to plant and soil health confront us from
time to time. . This is where location-specific research capability
becomes vital.

The national goal of agricultural research is the improvement of
the productivity, profitability, stability, and sustainability of the
major farming systems of a country. Sustainability has to be viewed
from the ecological as well as the economic angle. We cannot allow
depreciation of basic agricultural assets like land, water, flora, and
fauna. While ecological sustainability is basic to the future of
agriculture, economic sustainability at a given point in time becomes
vital for encouraging farmers to produce more. An effective national
agricultural research system, therefore, should look at both ends of the
‘spectrum. Improving productivity without detriment to the long-term
production potential of the soil and economic viability resulting in a
satisfactory "take-home income’ for the farmers are both essential.
This calls for biological and social scientists working together as a
eam.

2. Package of services

There would be no difference between applied and “ivory tower"
research if arrangements were not made to transfer the new technologies
to the farmers’ fields. In most countries of South. and Southeast Asia
where the average size of a farm holding is usually less than one
hectare, the cooperation and assistance of at least a million farming
NOTICE ,
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
families will be needed to produce an extra million tons of grain. No
production target can be achieved without first asking the question -"Why should farmers produce more and how will they produce more?"

By asking this question before preparing a development project, we
can get our priorities straight. We can then design a system which will
provide a package of services essential for all farmers to take
advantage of new technologies. In India, both government and private
agencies have been active in providing inputs like seeds, fertilizers,
pesticides, and, very importantly, credit. Government policies in the
development of effective input supply services have evolved over a
period of time. Public sector companies like the National Seeds
Corporation and credit institutions like the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development have become very important instruments
in India that enabled small farmers to adopt new technologies.

Mass media, particularly radio and the local language newspapers
have been extremely important in the dissemination of agricultural
information. Television is increasingly becoming a powerful communication tool. Extension services including the Training and Visit (T&V)
system of structured knowledge transfer have grown in capacity and
effectiveness.

The major goal of the input supply system is to render new techno
logy accessible to all farmers. Ensuring quality of access to
appropriate technology should be the foundation of agricultural
extension and development planning. Knowledge and skill transfer

systems and methods of providing inputs needed to convert knowledge into
field accomplishment must be synchronized in space and time. It is also
important that the input delivery systems are tailored to specific
socio-cultural conditions.

In India, several innovative systems of input delivery to
illiterate farmers have been developed by both government and private
agencies. For example, Credit Fairs have been organised to eliminate
red tape and corruption and to ensure that credit is utilized for the
intended purpose. The goals of a Credit Fair are the following:

a. Identify a well-designed production program or input supply
program such as construction of tubewells, farm ponds, and
other minor irrigation aspects, or the supply of fertilizers,
_seeds, and other production inputs.

b. Specify the criteria for credit eligibility including the
amount of credit and conditions under which this will be made
available.

c. Organize a tie-up between credit supply and the supply of
inputs for which the credit is intended.

d. Announce 3-4 weeks before the date of the Credit Fair the
details of the program including the location, conditions for
eligibility, etc.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
13

e. Organize teams of Fair managers consisting of representatives
from the concerned banks and input supply agencies. In
addition to the regular extension personnel, volunteers from
agricultural universities and institutions could be mobilized
in order to ensure that the program is carried out efficiently
and effectively. It will be important that a short training
program is organized for the Credit Fair managers so that they
can supervise the credit and input supply operation smoothly.

The National Commission on Agriculture which reviewed the progress
in Indian agriculture since 1928 gave a comprehensive report in 1975 on
methods of meeting future challenges. It recommended the organisation
of Farmers’ Service Societies all over the country to provide farmers
with credit and make available the inputs for which the loan is made,
all under the same roof.

In recent years, the availability of key inputs in remote areas has
been monitored rigorously. The system involves getting a checklist of
all essential activities verified at the village level during a
specified fortnight, usually several weeks before the date of sowing.
The organization of an Input Supply Fortnight is a good method of
monitoring the input distribution system and identifying its weak spots.
It serves as an early warning system so that critical bottlenecks are
removed before the onset of the sowing season.

3. Package of government policies

Even if good technologies are available and the input supply
system is efficient, farmers will not be able to derive benefit from
them unless some basic steps are taken by government. The first area of
action is in the realm of land reform. Farmers need to have a long-term
stake in the land to make them invest on infrastructure essential for
sustained productivity. Security of tenure, land. ownership pattern, and
size of the farmholding are areas that need particular attention.

In the past, land use decisions were taken by farming families
based largely on the needs of the family and the immediate neighbourhood. With the modernization of agriculture, farmers produce food
grains and other commodities not only for themselves, but more
‘importantly, for the market. When this transition takes place,
opportunities for producer-oriented and remunerative marketing become an
important factor in sustaining and stimulating farmers' interest in
modern technology.

Input-output pricing policies become crucial. The turning point in
Indian agriculture took place in 1964, when the Government of India set
up an Agricultural Prices Commission to recommend minimum prices for
food grains in order to provide an incentive to the farmers. The Food
Corporation of India was also set up to assure the farmers the minimum
price announced by the government. Announcing support price alone is
meaningless unless the government is able to honor its commitment to the
farmers that they do not have to sell at prices below the floor price.
The Government of India purchased all the surplus grain offered to

NOTICE )
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
14

government agencies by farmers. This is the reason for the fairly
substantial grain reserves now with the Government.

SYMPHONIC AND KNOWLEDGE-INTENSIVE PRODUCTION SYSTEMS

When packages of technology, services, and public policies are
developed and introduced in a mutually supportive manner, agricultural
progress is rapid. The investment policies of government ultimately
decide the fate of rural professions. Without adequate rural infrastructure such as roads, warehouses, and electricity, and facilities for
education and health care, rural areas will not attract technically
qualified people. In fact, the most serious form of brain drain in most
developing countries is the migration of educated and well-trained
persons from the village to the town. In India, as in most developing
countries, youth below the age of 21 constitute the majority of the
population. The future of agriculture and rural professions will depend
greatly on our ability to make agriculture both economically and
intellectually attractive. This calls for greater effort in developing
and popularising knowledge-intensive production systems. At the same
time, essential facilities for decent living and the opportunities to
acquire consumer goods should be provided in rural areas.

I have briefly dealt with some of the major ingredients of food
production policies and strategies in India, with emphasis on basic
principles rather than dates and details. Essentially, the lessons
learned from the Indian experience are the following:

a. Develop a strong national research capability in agriculture
which can help provide optimum returns from the land, water,
livestock, and capital resources;

b. Develop methods of transferring know-how and skills to farmers
and provide them with inputs necessary for converting
technological advances into production gains;

c. Introduce agrarian reform, rural development and
communication concepts, input-output pricing policies and
other programs which can stimulate and sustain the growth of
market-oriented farming; .

d. Stimulate consumption by the rural and urban poor through
various measures including Food for Work and Employment
Guarantee projects; and

e. Consider agriculture not just as a means to produce food for
the urban population but also as a powerful instrument to
increase income and employment. Such an approach is necessary
to generate diversified opportunities for enhancing the
purchasing power of the rural population. This will call for
a labour-friendly approach in technology development and
transfer.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
15

When all these components of an Agricultural Action Plan become
mutually reinforcing, we can use the term "Symphonic Agriculture” to
designate the evolutionary stage reached in the development of
sustainable agricultural production systems.

SUSTAINABLE NUTRITION SECURITY: A Seven-Point Action Plan for Africa

A Panel on Food Security and Environment of the Worid Commission on
Environment and Development (WCED) which I had the privilege to chair
has recently submitted a comprehensive report on methods of promoting
sustainable agricultural development which can help insulate humankind
from hunger. A /-Point Global Action Plan has been recommended for this
purpose. I would like to suggest the following 7-Point Action Plan for
Africa based on the Global Action Plan of the WCED Panel, considering
and adapting it in a manner relevant to the conditions prevailing in the
different countries:

Action Point 1. Sustainable livelihood security for the poor

Dr. Robert Chambers of the University of Sussex, U.K., and several
other scientists have repeatedly pointed out that sustainable livelihood
security for the poor is the only foundation on which sound
environmental planning can be done (Chambers, 1986). It is unfortunate
that the rich world as well as the rich in the developing countries do
not give priority to the rural poor in development programs. Mahatma
Gandhi in India emphasised that unless all development plans benefit to
the poorest sections of the community, such plans will only add to human
misery. He, therefore, pleaded for development programs based on the
principle of Antyodaya (i.e., priority attention to the poorest sections
of the community). What are the methods by which. sustainable livelihood
security for the poor can be promoted in their native habitats?

The first step is adopting appropriate meagures to distribute
assets such as land, livestock, trees, fishponds, or other sources of
income. Secondly, a strategy for providing jobs to everyone has to be
developed. This calls for a careful examination of opportunities
available in each village for on-farm and off-farm employment through an
integrated approach to the agricultural, industrial, and service
sectors. A new development ethos will have to be promoted which will
accord prominence to rural infrastructure in the country's development
‘agenda. Also, industrial and commercial activities that deprive the
poor of their livelihood should be prevented.

ction Point 2. Code for the sustainable and equitable use of the

: environmental systems

As mentioned earlier, we are losing ground all the time in the
protection of our basic life support systems. For example, the
irrigated farming in Africa during the last 25 years has not given
encouraging results in many places. In the Sahelian states of West
Africa, the amount of new land being brought under irrigation (around
5,000 ha) is roughly equal to the amount being abandoned each year
because of neglect and lack of maintenance (Club de Sahel, 1983).

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
16

All scientists engaged in developing new production techniques
should keep in mind this statement by B. F. Skinner:

"Every new source from which man has increased his power on earth
has been used to diminish the prospects of his successors. AI1l his
progress is being made at the expense of damage to the environment
which he cannot repair and cannot foresee."

Globally, developing countries face serious problems of forest
denudation, loss of genetic resources, loss of crop land, soil erosion,
and desertification. On the other hand, the key environmental problems
of developed countries include too much CO, concentration, presence of
trace gases such as methane, chlorofluorocarbons, ozone, nitrogen
oxides, and carbon tetrachloride, air pollution, acid rain, water
pollution, and hazardous wastes. The prospects for global weather
changes as a result of increased CO, in the atmosphere no longer
remain in the realm of speculation. {Te may have to be prepared for
significant shifts in the growing seasons.

A basic underlying cause for many of these problems is the rapid
growth in population since World War II. In October 1985, Prime
Minister Rajiv Gandhi gave a memorandum to the Secretary General of the
United Nations on behalf of thirty-five world leaders from developing
and developed countries and I wish to quote a few sentences from this
document:

"Mankind has many challenges: to obtain a lasting peace
between nations; to preserve the quality of the environment; to
conserve natural resources at a sustainable level; to advance the
economic and social progress of the less developed nations; and to
stabilize population growth.

At present there are 76 million more births than deaths on our
planet each year. If present rates continue by the year 2000,
there will be 100 million more births than deaths. A billion
people have been added in the last 13 years and the next billion
will be added in 12 years."

Ecological journals continuously publish alarming reports on the
consequences of the environmental damage now taking at an unprecedented
‘scale in developing countries. The African food crisis is in part a
result of such damage. The Second Citizen's Report on the state of
India’s environment (1948-85) published by the Centre for Science and
Environment in New Delhi indicates the seriousness of the situation in
Cifferent parts of India and should be read by all interested in
promoting sustainable agriculture.

In order to promote the sustainable and equitable use of the basic
life support systems of land, water, flora, fauna, and the atmosphere,
we reed to develop in each country an integrated code for the equitable
use of the environmental systems. The International Conference on
Implementing the World Conservation Strategy held recently in Ottawa has
stressed the urgent need for such a code to sustain our use of life
Support systems.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides,.may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
1?

We have adequate knowledge today to draw up a code giving broad
guidelines on how the basic life support systems of land, water, flora,
fauna, and the atmosphere can be used in a sustainable manner. The code
should not be a negative one indicating what should not be done, but
should be a positive one indicating what should and can be done at the
political, professional, and public levels to achieve accelerated
economic growth without harm to long-term terrestrial and aquatic
productivity. For the purpose of such a code, conservation should be
defined as a "guarantee of livelihood security to all people at all
times." A detailed national code could become the basic foundation on
which the sustainable use of each country's natural endowments can be
promoted. Fortunately, we already have several charters and resolutions
such as the World Charter for Nature of the UN and the World Soil
Charter of FAO which would be helpful in developing such national codes.

Implementing the code: Promotion of people's associations
at the grassroot level for sustainable development.

A code by itself will have little value unless effective means to
implement it are also developed. Obviously, a code for the sustainable
use of environmental assets will need the support of three major groups
for its effective implementation. The first is government. National
and, where appropriate, provincial governments will have to develop a
package of incentives to promote conservation-based development.
Secondly, the mass media will have to play a key role in promoting the
proper use of national assets and preventing their abuse. Thirdly, and
most importantly, the public will have to be the principal agents for
the effective implementation of the code. People's organizations at the
grassroot level can help mobilise community endeavour and "people power"
in the sustainable use of land and water, in the conservation of flora
and fauna, and in the prevention of atmospheric and terrestrial
pollution. Unfortunately, these do not exist in most countries. Many
developed and developing countries have nongovernmental organizations
that perform these tasks with varying degrees of success. The more
successful among these tend to remain as unique organizations and do not
become self-replicating and thereby universal. This is why we should
take steps to promote in each country an Association for Sustainable
Development at the village level. Schools, colleges, and universities
should spearhead this movement. In most developing countries, the youth
below the age of 21 constitutes over 50% of the population. The future
‘not only belongs to them; it depends on them.. It is therefore proper
that educational institutions be the meeting places for _ these
Associations. In many developing countries, the agenda for debate and
decision could include items such as:

1. How to promote a symphonic system of agriculture which could
lead to improved productivity without harming the long-term
production potential of land and water;

2. How to meet the fuel and fodder requirements of the
village;

3. How to substitute farm-grown inputs in place of market
purchased ones;

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.

18°

4. How to provide safe drinking water;
>. How to upgrade degraded lands;

6. How to ensure the livelihood security of the people in the
village who do not own any form of assets; and

7. How to organize community genetic conservation programs like
a Community Seed Bank.

Village level associations can join to form provincial and national
federations. National federations, in turn, can merge to form a global
federation which could review the progress made in improving the lot of
the global village inhabitants on a sustainable basis.

We also require a methodology for continuous monitoring of the
environmental balance sheet and for an effective early warning system
against ecological. disasters. For example, a 1947 article by Andre
Marie Aubreville in the FAO journal "Unasylva" warns about the
consequences of disappearing forests in Africa. Dr. Aubreville
described the processes that led to the forest getting gradually thinned
and becoming a grassland. In the course of the centuries, savannahs
replaced the forests and even these would have long since vanished had
it not been for the exceptional vitality of some of its component
species which manage to survive under adverse conditions. The damage
now occurring to the Himalayan ecosystems not only threatens the
livelihood security of the people living in the Himalayas but also of
the miliions who live, work, and farm in the Indo~Gangetic plains. We
need urgentiy a mechanism for forecasting forthcoming ecological
disasters. An Ecological Early Warning System may help to stimulate
timely action leading to the prevention of major disasters.

Action Point 3. Symphonic Agricultural System

An agricultural system designed to provide benefits both to small
producers and poor consumers will have to be based on ecologically sound
-agricultural practices. While careless technology can cause unmitigated
environmental disasters, _technologies carefully tailored to specific
_agro~ecological and socio-economic conditions can help provide bread on
a sustainable basis with no environmental degradation. We can thus keep
soil productivity at high levels today through adequate .soil health
monitoring and care. We can replenish soil fertility through an
integrated nutrient supply system consisting of organic recycling, green
manuring, scientific crop rotations, and the use of minimum essential
mineral fertilizers. The leguminous plant Sesbania rostrata from
Senegal is a wonderful nitrogen-producing factory since it fixes
atmospheric nitrogen both in the roots and stem. Because of the unusual
possibilities now open for raising the productivity of both crops and
farm animals, we can release annual crops from marginal lands and place
these lands under sylvi-pastoral or sylvi-horticultural or other agroforestry systems of land and water management. We can minimise or avoid
the use of chemical pesticides through an integrated systems of pest
management. Similarly, where water 18 extremely scarce, modern methods
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
19

can be modified and simplified to fit the needs of small farmers, as in
the delivery of water in closed conduits at high frequency and low
volumes directly to the root zone, Advances in molecular biology make
possible an integrated genetic conservation strategy ranging from the
establishment and protection of biosphere reserves and national parks
and other forms of in situ conservation to the creation of DNA libraries
particularly of species threatened with extinction. Above all, the
computer and communication revolutions have given us unusual powers to
effectively monitor and disseminate environmental and agricultural
information.

In addition to conservation-based production technology, a
symphonic agricultural system also involves adequate attention to
commerce and consumption.

Commerce

In domestic trade, both cost and quality influence consumer demand.
In international trade, competitive cost, desirable quality, and
stability of supply are important factors to consider. The Asian
experience during the last 20 years shows that if appropriate
technologies and remunerative marketing opportunities co-exist, impres
sive production gains can be achieved. Under commercial agriculture,
the old distinction between "food and cash crops" vanishes and all crops
become "cash crops." This is where government policies come in,

especially in the area of infrastructure development for improved
postharvest technology, marketing, and transport as well in the aspect
of ensuring fair returns to producers and reasonable prices to
consumers. Most developing nations have to improve production by small
farmers simultaneously with consumption by the rural and urban poor.
Hence attention to policy formulation becomes crucial at this point.

Grain drying is an area of great concern in post-harvest handling.
Many poor farmers have to dry their produce either on roads and/or
roofs. Inadequate drying could lead to aflotoxin production resulting
in liver ailments like hepatitis. There is much scope for developing
grain dryers based on the use of renewable energy sources like sunlight,
wind, and biomass,

The unfavorable trade situation prevents farmers from buying inputs
like mineral fertilizers (Table 7}. Against this backdrop, what can
African national research systems do to set their own research
priorities? Il give below some areas of research which in my view need
added attention:

® Reduction of production cost without reduction in yield

through a more efficient use of purchased inputs, substitution
of market purchased inputs with farm~-grown ones, and through
genetic methods, ,

* Tailoring the grain quality to match differential trade needs,
and

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
20 |

* Promoting stability through:
a. Minimizing risks of pest epidemics,

b. Risk distribution agronomy to suit different weather
probabilities based on computer simulation models, and

c. Promotion of sound public policies.

Consumption

In this field we face two contrasting challenges. On one hand, the
rural and urban poor suffer from undernutrition and malnutrition due to
inadequate purchasing power. On the other hand, the food habits of the
more affluent sector of the population are fast changing.

Globally over 300 million tonnes of grain reserves and over 300
million hungry people co-exist today. A similar paradox is found in our
country. As early as 1861, Col. Baird Smith remarked that “Indian
famines are not famines of food but of work. Where there is work, there
is money and where there is money, there is food." If a famine of food

was the major obsession in the immediate past, a famine of jobs will be
the central preoccupation of the immediate future. Fortunately, a drop

in the consumer price of rice and other food grains helps the poor
families. During the last 10 years, as a result of higher food grain
production and productivity, poor Asian families received substantial
benefits.

Horticultural produce and products occupy an important. place in the
emerging category of “health foods of the future." Many African countries can grow a wide range of fruits, vegetables, and flowers but in
this sector, there is an even greater gap between production and
postharvest technologies as compared to food grains. We urgently need
concerted efforts in improving postharvest handling and produceroriented marketing, if programs in the field of horticulture are to have
the desired impact on income and nutrition.

How can we help in-adding the dimension of income and employment
‘generation to the major farming systems? In this context, the following
areas of research are relevant:

5 Income and nutrition orientation to farming and cropping
systems research,

® Improved postharvest technology,
e Biomass utilization, and
# Management aspects of a decentralized production system

supported by key centralized services.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
21

It is obvious that the farm sector alone cannot absorb all the
surplus landless labor in the rural areas. We have to give a new
orientation to the concept of land and livestock reform and widen this
concept to include all forms of asset reform. For example, in rural
areas, hew technological opportunities need not bypass the poor if steps
are taken immediately to train rural women and men in the intelligent
and effective use of emerging technologies such as biotechnology and
microelectronics. In fact, rural development should be defined as the
conversion of all unskilled persons into skilled ones. It is only in
this way that productivity can be enhanced and the quality of life be
improved. Instead of just measuring a "yield gap," we should turn our
attention now to the removal of constraints responsible for an "income

gap" in the rural professions (Fig. 3).

SMALL FARM MANAGEMENT

Inadequate attention to small farm management has increased
production costs and risk. Agricultural scientists must find more ways
to enhance the resource neutrality of technology by substituting
nonmonetary or inexpensive inputs: for high-cost inputs and minimizing
yield fluctuations caused by weather aberrations and pest epidemics.
New technologies must ensure that labor demand increases faster than its
supply and that food supply increases faster than its demand. These
objectives require that social, biological, and physical scientists work
as teams.

New systems of small farm management must marry individual
initiative and group endeavor. Japan has pioneered yield increases in
agriculture through integrated systems of research, extension, input
supply (including credit) and remunerative pricing. In China, a
household responsibility system of crop production has been superimposed
over social land ownership. This provides a mechanism for blending
collective management of farm operations such as irrigation, plant
protection, and postharvest operations with individual enterprise and
initiative. : ) |

In countries where land is individually owned, can social or group
management of key farm operations be superimposed on individual
initiative and ownership rights? Qbviously, farmers have often done
this themselves. Agricultural research organizations‘ can help by
‘demonstrating how enlightened self-interest demands that farmers living ©
in a watershed or a village participate in the management of farm
operations that elevate and stabilize yield per unit of cash input. In
particular, there is immediate need for increasing returns from
“rrigated agriculture through equitable systems of water distribution
and better on-farm management of water. The major irrigation systems of
the world are in Asia, but there is considerable scope for improving
productivity per unit of water.

Farmers live in a world of action, not of words, so personal
experience is the only meaningful source of conviction. Therefore, they
must be shown how blending of individual ownership and group action can
better serve the interests of the individual and the community in the
Same manner that China is demonstrating how social ownership and

NOTICE °

The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides,-may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
22 «

individual initiative can be combined in a meaningful way. In many
African nations, land ownership is communal. This calls for imaginative
approaches in providing incentives for both individual initiative and
collective endeavor.

Action Point 4. Science and Technology

Modern science and technology provide the tools essential for
increasing production on a sustainable basis. Improved productivity per
hectare makes it possible to place marginal lands under agro-forestry,
sylvi-pastoral, and other systems of land management. Thus, land use
planning which is ecologically sound becomes a reality. Knowledge
intensive production systems can help save land and capital through
measures such as the following:

° Promote the use of farm grown inputs and reduce dependence on
inputs based on fossil fuel,

8 Maximize the returns from the available labor, land, water,
and financial resources, .

* Pay greater attention to achieving a more productive,
profitable, stable, and sustainable farming system.

The few areas of research relevant to the development of
knowledge-intensive production systems are:

® Transdisciplinary research, e.g., integrated pest management,
integrated nutrient supply, biotechnology, postharvest
technology;

e Blending traditional and frontier technologies, e.g., agricul
tural refineries designed to produce value-added products from
agricultural biomass;

° Farming systems research on technological and socio-economic
aspects, including women employment and income;

® Linkages with international data banks through advanced
computer and telecommunication systems for up-to-date data on
trends in climate, production, prices and demand~supply
situations.

The results of the work carried out at the International Institute
ef Tropical Agriculture (IITA) in Ibadan, Nigeria, the Sahelian Center
of the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT) in Niger, and the International Livestock Center for Africa
(ILCA) in Ethiopia have helped introduce not only improved varieties of
cassava, corn, sorghum, cowpea, and several other crops but also
sustainable systems of land. The alley cropping technique, in
particular, merits large-scale adoption.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, .may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.

23

The power of modern science is exemplified by the work of
Australian scientists who introduced the tree legume Leucaena
leucocephala to feed Africa's ruminant livestock. The scientists have
discovered rumen bacteria that appear to solve the problem of
mimosine-DHP toxicity, thereby making it possible to use large
quantities of tree foliage as feed. ILCA is now testing these bacteria
in Africa (ILCA Newsletter, April 1986).

How do we promote the growth of appropriate technologies in
developing countries? The first requisite is the development of a
suitable national mechanism for examining different technology options
and selecting those which are relevant to the socio-economic and sociocultural conditions of the country. A national technology policy could
adopt a three-pronged approach. First, direct introduction of frontier
areas of technology should be done in fields such as computer sciences,
satellite imagery, microelectronics, and biotechnology in order to
purchase time. Secondly, traditional technologies should be preserved
and enriched through improved marketing and other facilities. Thirdly,
old and new technologies should be blended in such a manner that the
market value of the old technology becomes enhanced. We need to develop
a socially and an economically beneficial blend of traditional and
modern technologies in different areas of agriculture.

Governments should give explicit recognition to "technology access"
Since it will be difficult to persuade small farmers to take to new
technology without strong government policies in extension and
input-output pricing.

A great need in developing countries is the availability of a large
number of trained professionals who can help transfer research findings
from the laboratory to the farmers' field. We need for this purpose a
corps of young professionals dedicated to . the cause of rural
development.

In cooperation with the rural communities, a consortium of research
and training institutions at the national, regional, and international
levels is needed to help generate socially and economically relevant
technologies.

I wish to deal briefly with science-based strategies which can be
‘built into the national planning process. In countries south of the
Sahel, planning for adverse weather must become an integral part of the
national development strategy. How can we do this?

Mitigating the Unfavourable Impact of Adverse Weather

Scientists have often tried to predict the impact of weather on

cron yields. Crop-weather simulation models provide a useful insight
inte the effect of-weather variables on crop production. In the United
States, scenarios for yield prediction based on expected weather con~
ditions have been constructed for wheat, sorghum, soybeans, maize, and
other crops, and models for rice are being developed. Although these
models are still in an early stage of development, their value in the
| NOTICE .

The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or

redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
“wm OFS
Tene,

24°

monsoon xegions is obvious: if the monsoon behavior can be predicted
early, farming strategies can be adjusted and yields estimated.
Planners and decision makers in governments would then be able to
estimate the size of food reserves that must be maintained to ensure
food security.

Remote sensing techniques and continuous monitoring of monsoon
behavior have helped in the development of crop production forecasts.
These have been used since 1975 by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAQ) in operating a global early warning system.
The system provides information to help initiate suitable preventive and
remedial measures for overcoming the crop failure problems. Obviously,
the early warning system has to be accompanied by a capability for a
timely action. If an early warning on yield and production decline can
be theoretically analyzed with reference to the food requirement, it
should not be difficult to arrange for the needed supply through
coordinated national and international action. For example, according
to FAO statistics, the world cereal stocks at the end of 1986 are
expected to be over 300 million tons. This volume of stocks represents
]8% of the expected world consumption.

There are thus adequate food reserves in the world to prevent
famine provided the early warning system is utilized effectively to
arrange for food delivery in areas that need them most. The recent
experience in Africa, however, indicates the complexity of famine relief
operations particularly when the physical infrastructure such as rural
roads and a political framework for action are not existing.

To capitalize on newly developed cropping technology and to be able
to use photoperiod-insensitive and early maturing crop varicitsn, if
would be advisable to organize in each agroclimatic zone a Crop Weather
Watch Group. © This group composed of a meteorologist, an agronomist, a
statistician, an agricultural engineer, and a development administrator
should regularly monitor weather conditions relative to crop growth
potential and make recommendations to the appropriate agricultural
extension and development agencies about crop selection and management
strategies. Mass media will be particularly helpful in the
dissemination of useful information and guidelines.

Aside from steps undertaken to limit the effects of monsoon failure |

on crop production, administrative measures are needed to ensure a
stable supply of food and drinking water in calamity-prone areas.
Conservation and storage of water and increased food grain reserves in
areas vulnerable to abnormal monsoons must be encouraged. Recent
studies have evaluated several natural disaster pianning projects.
Sarma (1983) reviewed literature on contingency planning for famines and
other acute food shortages. In 1983, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (1984) documented the impact of
drought in the Sahel. Amartya Sen (1981) made a penetrating analysis of
the great Bengal famine of 1943, the Ethiopian famine, drought and
famine in the Sahel, and the famine in Bangladesh. Ali these analyses
can provide guidelines for future action to mitigate the adverse impact
of abnormal monsoons.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides,.may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
aA

25

Briefly stated, the drought and disaster management strategy will
consist of the following major components:

1. Relief and rehabilitation measures in the most seriously
affected (MSA) areas

MSA regions characterized by acutely distressed human and livestock
populations have to be given highest priority in relief and
rehabilitation measures. Carefully designed Food for Nutrition programs
sponsored by enlightened donors can provide much needed relief to the

“old and the infirm, children, and pregnant and nursing mothers.

Simultaneously, a Food for Work program has to be operated on an
open-ended basis to provide opportunities for all who can work and earn
their daily bread, and to develop the infrastructure necessary for
drought management.

The kind of work that can be undertaken will vary from place to
place. Wherever possible, Food for Work programs should include the
establishment of drinking water sanctuaries, underground water
harvesting, and organization of livestock camps near a water source.
Here, livestock can be fed with a maintenance ration consisting of any
available cellulosic material enriched by urea and an energy source like
molasses.

2. Compensatory food production programs in the most favorable
areas (MFA)

MFAs are defined as areas where soil moisture is adequate to
sustain.a crop. Areas with assured irrigation and those with moisture
retentive soils fall under this category. In such places, more
intensive production drives can be launched through a steady supply of
inputs like improved seeds and fertilizers at reasonable prices. To
bridge the gap between potential and actual yields in the MFA, using the
best available technology, supported by a complementary package of
services (particularly credit) and government policies, must be used.

3. Good weather code for drought-prone areas

1
‘

Only during the years where rainfall is good can meaningful work be
done to contain desertification and build an ecological infrastructure
necessary for a stable agriculture. A Good Weather Code is, in this
case, necessary. The code would list all the steps that should be
undertaken in normal rainfall years such as soil conservation, water
harvesting, afforestation, aerial seeding, building seed reserves, and
others.

Unfortunately, at this time neither national nor international
sources of additional funding become, available. Consequently, unique
onportunities for economic development are lost. While a "fire brigade"
operation attracts funds, the less glamorous kind of programs fail in
this regard. This is emphasizing the importance of a good weather code
in any scientific monsoon management system (Swaminathan, 1973).

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
26 
. Action Point 5. Knowledge and skill sharing

Extension technologies will have to be tailored to local
conditions. Farmers usually learn better from each other than from
outsiders. Therefore, considerable emphasis will have to be given to
convince farmers about the economic soundness of the new methods and
materials which they are asked to adopt. Knowledge and skill transfer
should be synchronized with the transfer of inputs essential to apply
the new knowledge. Often, extension programs fail because the practices
recommended do not match the available inputs. Moreover, we should
realize that illiteracy is not an impediment to adoption provided the
training method is based on the work experience and not the classroom
exposure of the individual. The rural women and men who are perceived
as illiterate are the very same persons who can produce exquisite
handicrafts, textiles, and other home-made products.

The revolution in modern communication can immensely help in
promoting a learning revolution along non-conventional lines. Here is
an opportunity for developing countries to achieve a quantum leap in the
technological upgrading of traditional professions. More investment is
needed to develop communication software. The technical literacy
movement has to be led by mass media on one hand, and by a new breed of
teachers with their "learning by doing " technique, on the other.

Action Point 6. Resource mobilization and utilization
Ultimately, good programs and ideas will remain only on paper and

will be heard only in conference halls unless the required financial,
technical, and other resources are mobilised to convert them into

concrete accomplishments. ~L need hardly emphasise the crucial
significance of the integrated use of all these available resources -national, bilateral, and multilateral -- in strict accordance with

national priorities.

External assistance can be in the form of expatriate expertise,
food and agricultural commodities, equipment and machinery, and capital.
The Indian experience reveals that external assistance can be of great
value provided such assistance is integrated with national resources and
utilized strictly in accordance with national needs and priorities.
Much has been said for and against food and commodity aid. In 1966,
India received nearly 10 million tonnes of food grains, largely from the
PL480 Program of the USA. It was in the same year that the Government
of India initiated a High Yielding Varieties Program in order to do away
with food aid as quickly as possible. Consequently, by 1971, a grain
reserve of over 10 million tonnes was built. External assistance often
becomes essential and can be extremely valuable at certain points in
time. Government action, however, should be designed to achieve a
self-eliminating role for such external help and not make it
seli-perpetuating, thereby eroding national self-reliance in the
process.

Commodity aid can be helpful if it can help generate local
financial resources that in the end will make such commodity aid
unnecessary. wher is eeporean is to use SOMmO ALY an to promote

; = e The Lon
The PDFs of ioaharancee jan other dot nts fg agaanttict provi 1S may be protected Operat t Law, if W 994. case no a2 Yiuction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or

copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
27

Development program in India, which derived part of its resources from
the dairy products supplied by the European Economic Community, and the
vegetable oil production project, which received in part edible oils
donated by the Cooperative League of the USA and Canada, are examples
where commodity aid had been deliberately accepted, precisely to end the
dependence on foreign countries for those very commodities. It would be
interesting to study how external help, whether in the form of cash,
commodities or technical services, can be used to strengthen national
self-reliance instead of destroy it.

Action Point 7. Political commitment and accountability

The World Food Council was established to generate the necessary
political will and commitment for insulating the rural and urban poor
from hunger. I need not therefore elaborate on the seminal role which
political will plays in national development. Arturo Tanco'’s life and
achievements indicate what a visionary political leader, totally committed to the cause of national and global food security, can accomplish
within a span of 10 years.

May I conclude by once again reminding this distinguished audience
that just 20 years ago, Asia was a continent of concern and Africa was
not even mentioned in most of the prominent books dealing: with famine.
Today, it is Africa's turn to be on the spotlight in mankind's struggle
against hunger. Africa has many blessings -- land, a wide range of
mineral wealth, and above all, the cheerful and hardworking women and
men. Even now, the problem of several African countries is how to
ensure remunerative prices to farmers. Regional nutrition security
systems can be developed speedily because of the existence of regional
organizations in different parts of Africa. The African version of the
"green revolution” can be built on the twin foundations of ecological
and economic sustainability if African political and professional
leaders will use wisely the knowledge gained during the last 20 year in
Asia. However, this will not be an easy task. .In agriculture, as in
other areas of human endeavor, there are no "miracles." Only hard and
sustained work supported by selfless and visionary leadership will help
to make the African agricuitural opportunity into a reality.

Ten years from now, I would guess that the future Tanco lecturer
will have to deal with the food problems of Asia rather than Africa.
‘Asia has many more fundamental handicaps -- large population, growing ~
unemployment, diminishing land resources for agriculture, and varying
degrees of damage to mountain, lake, and river ecosystems. We can avert
the potential disasters in Asia in the 1990s provided the symphonic
system of resource management to which I referred to earlier can become
the normal method of program development and implementation.

Hunger is a multidimensional problem. Unfortunately, our planning
and implementation procedures, both in the public and private sectors,
are predominantly unidimensional. The World Food Council, The Hunger
Project and the other organizations concerned with the development of
sustainable nutrition security systems in all parts of the world can
achieve their goal only if they make political leaders, professional
experts, and the public work together in a mutually supportive manner.

NoTide
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution MSSMItEANCRopy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use. ,
REFERENCES

Aubreville, Andre M.A. 1985. The disappearance of the tropical forests
of Africa. Unasylva, 37 (148):18-27.

Biswas, Asit K, 1986. Irrigation in Africa (unpublished paper).

Chambers, R. 1986, Sustainable livelihood thinking: An approach to
poverty, environment and development. Conference on Conservation
and Development, Ottawa, 1986.

Club de Sahel. 1983. Chairman's Report: Special meeting on the role of
the Club du Sahel. May 19, Paris: OECD.

International Livestock Centre for Africa. 1986. ILCA Newsletter,
Vol. 5 No. 2 April.

Lofchie, M. F. 1975. Political and economic origins of African hunger.
J. Mod. African Studies. 13(4):551-567.

Mellor, J. W., C. Delgado and M. Blackie (ed). 1986. Accelerating food
production growth in sub-Saharan Africa. John Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore (forthcoming).

Paddock, William ancl Paul Paddock, 1967. Famine - 1975! Little,
Brown & Company, Boston. 276 pp.

Ramaswamy, V.S. 1985. A study of the marketing of fertilisers in
India. Hope Press, Madras, 280 p.

Sarma, J. S. 1983. Contingency planning for famines and other acute
food shortages: a brief review. International Food Policy Research
Institute, Wnsbington, D.C. 28 pp.

Saouma, ii, 1984, World Food Report 1983. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy. 64 pp.

Sen, A. 1981. Poverty and famine: An essay on entitlement and
deprivation, Clarendon Press, Oxford, U.K.

‘Swaminachau, M.S, 1984. Nutrition and agricultural development: new
frontiers. Food and nutrition Vol. 10, No. 1 (1984), pp. 33-41.

Swaminathan, M.S. 1983. Agricultural progress - key to third world
prosperity. Third World Quarterly, July 1983, Vol. 5, No. 3.
pp.553~-566.

Swaminathan, M. $. 1973. Sardar Patel Lecture of the All India Radio
=~ India's agricultural future.

United Nations. 1986. Draft report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Thirteenth Special Session. 22 pp.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Table 1. World soil resources and their limitations for agriculture

Drought Minera] Shallow Water Perma~ No serious

stress depth excess frost limitation
alee annie taeienienteaas % of total land area ~------~-------
North America 20 22 10 10 16 22
Central America 32 16 17 10 - 25
South America l7 47 1] 10 = 15
Europe 8 33002C2*«*“‘<‘« WL 8 3 36
Africa 44 18 13 9 ~ 16
South Asia 43 5 23 11 — 18
North and

Central Asia 17 9 38 13 13 10
Southeast Asia 2 59 6 19. - 14
Australasia 55 6 8 =—_:16 . 15

|

World 28 23 22 10 6 11

Nutritional deficiencies or toxicities related to chemical
composition or mode of origin.

Source: Data compiled from FAO/UNESCO Soil map of the world, Paris,
1971-81. UNESCO.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Table 2. Importance of irrigation in seven leading countries, 1982

Irrigated area as 4 of area under

Country | temporary and permanent crops
Egypt 98.6
Madagascar 32.0
Swaziland ZL wh
Sudan 14.1
Mauritius 13.1
Mauretania 12.0
Gambia 11.9
|
NOTICE

The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Index (1954-56 =100) Index (1954-56=100) 180

160

140
100
120
80
Paddy area 100
per capita
60
rg) a OF
* 1955 — 60 65 70 15 . 80 84
Year

Fig 1 Trends in paddy yield and paddy area per capita, South and
Southeast Asia, 1955-84.

NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides,“may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
| ‘asn jeuoNeonps pue YyoJeesal |elOJOWUUIWOD-UOU ‘JeEUOSJEd JNOA JO} A}}OIS PEplAOJd Si JUSLUNDOP siy | “Jepjoy yyHUAdoo
JO JOYSI|Gnd ay} WO. UOISSIWWAd DIJO9eds JOU SaJINbSl ‘S}SI| O} 8}NQIJ}SIPOJ O} JO ‘SJOAIBS UO }SOd oO} ‘ysI|qnda, 0} ‘Adoo O| ‘payed si UONNqj}sIPaL
JO uoljonposdes OU Bsed YOIYM UI! ‘Me JUBIAdOD Aq peyoajoud aq Aetu ‘sapiAoid Asesqiz [YY] JEU} S}JU@LUNDOP JSU}O pue sajoNe jeuNO!l jo S4qd SUL
ADILON

aD
Oo
oO)
©
oa)
D
8 + ~
= a.
a § oO .
c O ;
= 5
oO.
NS 0 = wf N ie
@ Pr 7 =
E Oo
<I Pal
.~ aan
5 i;
- £
5
a5
i
i
©
N
o
Oo *
OQ NI
i) e
©
™m 11-09
o fry
@)
=
So
Te)
©
O _
® IO
~~ Xo)
4
3 fe) in
= e)
Table 4. Annual rates of deforestation and plantation
(1981-1985)

Annual rates of deforestation Annual Plantation
Tree formations rates of deforestation
Region Ciosed Open ~ All plantation ratio
eee He ee ‘O00 ha --+--------~-----------~

Tropical America Se
(23 countries) 4,339 1,272 5,611 535 1:10.5

Tropical Africa
(37 countries) 1,331 2,345 3,676 126 1:29

Tropical Asia | : .

(16 countries) 1,826 190 2,016 438 1:4.5
Total .

(76 countries) 7,496 3,807 11,303 1,099 i:10

Source: FAO. Tropical forestry action plan. Committee on Forest 1985.
Development in the Tropics. Rome. , ,

— oe a ees se me.

: NOTICE
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
Table 3. Sub-Saharan Africa: Estimates of Irrigated Areas,
1982 in Relation to Irrigation Potential

Area Developed 1982 ('000 ha)

Irrigation Small-scale Developed as
Count ry Potential § Modern’ or Traditional Total % of Potential
('000 ha)

Angola 6,700 0 10 10 < i
Benin ) 86 7 - 32 19 22
Botswana — 100. 0 12 12 12
Burkina Faso 350 9 20 29 8
Burundi av: 2 4 6 12
Cameroon | 240 Li ) 20 8
Central African

Republic 1,900 0 4 4 < 1
Chad 1,200 11 20 46 4
Congo 340 3 5 8 2
Equatorial 7

Guinea n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. nea.
Ethiopia 670 68 45 113 17
Gabon _ ) 440 0 1 1 < Jl
Gambia 72 6 20 26 36
Ghana 120 8 50 58 78
Guinea 150 50 135 185 > 100
Guinea Bissau 70 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Ivory Coast 130 33 yA) 62 48
Kenya os 350 21 28 49 14
Lesotho — 8 0 1 - 1 13.
Liberia n.a. 8 16 -- 24 n.a.
Madagascar 1,200 160 800 $60 80
Malawi ) 290 19 2 21 7
Mati 340 983 57 150 44
Mauritania . 39 3 2 _ 23 59
Mauritius - “Tha. 9. , 5 14. n.a@.
Mozambique 2,400 66 4 70 3
Niger 100 7 17 24 24
Nigeria = — 2,000 35 - 805 840 | 42 —
Rwanda 44 0. 5 15 34
senegal - 180 98 89 187 >100
Sierra Leone 100 5 100 "105 - >100
Somalia &7 a5 50 85 98
Sudan 3,300 1,700 - 1,700 52
Swaziland 4 55 . 5 60 >100
Tanzania 2,300 -- 34 106 140 6
Togo ) 86 2 8 10— 12
Uganda 410 9 3 12 3
Zaire 4 ,000 4 38 42 1
Zambia 3,500 14 Z 16 < J
Zimbabwe 280 140 : 6 146 De

33,64] 2,725 2,568 5,293 15.7

sources: Study team estimates of areas developed; irrigation
poten ntials from FAO Land anNOWSter Division, 1985
The PDFs of journal articles an other documents that IRRI item provides,may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use. ,
Figure 3. |
CONCEPTUAL MODEL FOR THE STUDY OF
CONSTRAINTS RESPONSIBLE FOR INCOME GAP

(assuming absence of yield gap)

Potential
Income

Technica! Constraints

® High.cost inputs

@ Low input use efficiency
® Poor post-harvest technology @ ‘ @ inefficient biomass use )
A income: .
a Gap

Socio-economic Constraints

Actual
Income

Knowledge and skill transfer
Terms of credit

Terms of trade

Marketing infrastructure
Producer oriented institutions
Government Policies

mo, . NOTICE .
The PDFs of journal articles and other documents that IRRI Library provides, may be protected by Copyright Law, in which case no reproduction or
redistribution is permitted. To copy, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission from the publisher or
copyright holder. This document is provided strictly for your personal, non-commercial research and educational use.
